           F-PROT SHAREWARE ANTI-VIRUS PRICING/ORDERING INFORMATION

Please note that the information given below only applies to the English
language shareware version of the program, which is only available
directly from Iceland.

                               PRIVATE USE

The English-language shareware version of the F-PROT anti-virus program is
free of charge for private use (that is, free for any individual or family
using it on a personally owned computer).

Private users may obtain free updates from BBSes, via FTP or E-mail. See
UPDATES.TXT for info.

                              F-PROT LICENSES

Licenses are available from Frisk Software International to companies,
organizations and institutions in USA, Canada and countries where no
distributor for the F-PROT Professional version has been established.

The cost for a site license depends on the estimated number of computers in
the company or department covered by the license. There is a minimum fee of
US$20 per year.

                 1 - 2500     $1.00 per computer ($20 minimum)
              2501 - 5000     $0.75 per computer
              5001 - 7500     $0.50 per computer
              7501 - 10000    $0.25 per computer
             10001 and up     call for information

Example: A license for 4500 computers would be

                2500 computers at $1.00   $2500
                2000 computers at $0.75   $1500
                                         
         which gives a total of $4000 per year

The customer is not expected to keep accurate count of the number of computers
which the software is installed on, only to provide a reasonable estimate.

If you just order a site license, we assume that you already have the
program, and that you will be obtaining new versions of the program by FTP
or download them from bulletin boards.  In this case, all you receive from
us is just an invoice and a paper copy of the license, if requested.  If
you need a diskette with the latest version, please add $20 (or $100 for a
1-year subscription).

                            EDUCATIONAL DISCOUNT

There is a 25% educational discount of the license fee, although the $20
minimum fee still applies.  There is no charge for the use of the program
on computers personally owned by students/staff.  This discount does not
apply to the subscription fee.


                             OBTAINING UPDATES

There is no additional fee for updates if they are obtained from BBSes,
from CompuServe, AOL or other such services, or via FTP from one of the
Internet archive servers, such as Garbo or Simtel.  Please see the file
UPDATES.TXT for a list of FTP distribution sites.

If you cannot use any of those options, we offer a bimonthly mail-update
service, for a fixed annual fee of US$100, added to the license fee.


                                HOW TO ORDER

We accept regular purchase orders from corporations and educational or
government institutions.

Orders should be sent to
                              Frisk Software International
                              Postholf 7180
                              IS-127 Reykjavik
                              Iceland

or sent by fax:               +354-561-7274

or by e-mail:                 sales@complex.is

                              METHODS OF PAYMENT

You may pay with a check (payable to Frisk Software International),
international money order or a VISA/EuroCard/MasterCard/Access credit
card (please specify card number, card holder's name and expiration date).  
Please note that we do not accept American Express or Diners Club credit
cards.

Users in Europe, please note:  We accept payment by Eurochecks, but they
should be either in Icelandic kronor, or your own currency - not a third
currency like US dollars, as the fee we have to pay to cash the check
would be $25.

Users in Canada, please note: If paying by a check in US$, issued by a
Canadian bank, please make sure the check states that it is payable through
some US bank.  If the check is drawn on an US$ account in a Canadian bank,
and no mention made of an US bank, it can only be cashed in Canada and the
US - we would have to return it.  

Please do not send payment in the form of an US Postal Money Order - it
cannot be cashed in Iceland.
